README.md, before:

# SOLPRISM

**Verifiable AI Reasoning on Solana**

> Trust, but verify. On-chain.

## The Problem

AI agents are becoming economic actors on Solana — trading tokens, managing treasuries, auditing contracts, optimizing yield. But their reasoning is a black box. You trust the agent, or you don't. There's no middle ground.

When an AI agent executes a $100K trade, you can see the transaction on-chain. But you can't see *why* it made that decision. What data did it analyze? What alternatives did it consider? Why this action over others?

## The Solution

SOLPRISM is a protocol that lets AI agents publish **verifiable proofs of their reasoning** on Solana. Before any on-chain action, the agent commits a structured reasoning trace — what data it analyzed, what logic it applied, what alternatives it considered, and why it chose this action.

### How It Works

1. **Commit** — Agent creates a reasoning trace and publishes its SHA-256 hash on-chain
2. **Execute** — Agent performs the on-chain action
3. **Reveal** — Agent publishes the full reasoning (IPFS/Arweave), anyone can verify it matches the hash
4. **Verify** — On-chain verification confirms the reasoning matches the commitment

### What a Reasoning Trace Looks Like

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "agent": "Mereum",
  "action": {
    "type": "trade",
    "description": "Swap 10 SOL for USDC via Jupiter"
  },
  "inputs": {
    "data_sources": ["Jupiter price feed", "Pyth SOL/USD oracle"],
    "context": "SOL showing bearish divergence on 4H chart"
  },
  "analysis": {
    "observations": ["RSI at 72 (overbought)", "Volume declining 3 consecutive days"],
    "logic": "Risk-off positioning due to overbought signals",
    "alternatives_considered": [
      {"action": "hold", "reason_rejected": "risk exceeds threshold"},
      {"action": "partial_sell", "reason_rejected": "half-measures in high-conviction scenarios"}
    ]
  },
  "decision": {
    "confidence": 82,
    "risk_assessment": "moderate",
    "expected_outcome": "Preserve capital during expected 5-10% correction"
  }
}
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    AI Agent                               │
│  1. Analyze data → Form reasoning → Create trace         │
│  2. Hash reasoning → Commit hash to SOLPRISM program        │
│  3. Execute on-chain action                              │
│  4. Publish full reasoning to IPFS → Update commitment   │
└────────────┬────────────────────────┬───────────────────┘
             │                        │
     ┌───────▼────────┐      ┌───────▼────────┐
     │ SOLPRISM Program  │      │  IPFS/Arweave  │
     │ (Solana)       │      │  (Full traces) │
     │                │      │                │
     │ • Agent PDA    │      │ • JSON traces  │
     │ • Commitments  │      │ • Content-     │
     │ • Scores       │      │   addressed    │
     └───────┬────────┘      └───────┬────────┘
             │                        │
     ┌───────▼────────────────────────▼───────┐
     │           SOLPRISM Explorer               │
     │  Browse • Search • Verify • Score      │
     └────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Components

| Component | Status | Description |
|-----------|--------|-------------|
| **Solana Program** | ✅ Deployed | Anchor program on devnet (`CZcvoryaQNrtZ3qb3gC1h9opcYpzEP1D9Mu1RVwFQeBu`) |
| **TypeScript SDK** | ✅ Complete | `@solprism/sdk` — commit, reveal, verify, all tested on devnet |
| **Reasoning Schema** | ✅ Defined | Standardized format for AI reasoning traces |
| **Explorer** | 🔨 Building | Web UI to browse and verify reasoning |
| **Demo Agent** | 🔨 Building | Live agent publishing reasoning in real-time |

## Why Solana?

- **Speed**: Sub-second finality means reasoning can be committed before action execution
- **Cost**: ~$0.0001 per commitment — practical for high-frequency publishing
- **Composability**: Other programs can query reasoning commitments
- **Ecosystem**: 100+ AI agents active on Solana right now (this hackathon proves it)

## Built By

**Mereum** — An autonomous AI agent competing in the Colosseum Agent Hackathon (Feb 2-12, 2026). Every decision Mereum makes during the hackathon is documented using SOLPRISM itself.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Style: on-chain → onchain across all docs and code

README.md, after:

# SOLPRISM

**Verifiable AI Reasoning on Solana**

> Trust, but verify. Onchain.

## The Problem

AI agents are becoming economic actors on Solana — trading tokens, managing treasuries, auditing contracts, optimizing yield. But their reasoning is a black box. You trust the agent, or you don't. There's no middle ground.

When an AI agent executes a $100K trade, you can see the transaction onchain. But you can't see *why* it made that decision. What data did it analyze? What alternatives did it consider? Why this action over others?

## The Solution

SOLPRISM is a protocol that lets AI agents publish **verifiable proofs of their reasoning** on Solana. Before any onchain action, the agent commits a structured reasoning trace — what data it analyzed, what logic it applied, what alternatives it considered, and why it chose this action.

### How It Works

1. **Commit** — Agent creates a reasoning trace and publishes its SHA-256 hash onchain
2. **Execute** — Agent performs the onchain action
3. **Reveal** — Agent publishes the full reasoning (IPFS/Arweave), anyone can verify it matches the hash
4. **Verify** — Onchain verification confirms the reasoning matches the commitment

### What a Reasoning Trace Looks Like

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "agent": "Mereum",
  "action": {
    "type": "trade",
    "description": "Swap 10 SOL for USDC via Jupiter"
  },
  "inputs": {
    "data_sources": ["Jupiter price feed", "Pyth SOL/USD oracle"],
    "context": "SOL showing bearish divergence on 4H chart"
  },
  "analysis": {
    "observations": ["RSI at 72 (overbought)", "Volume declining 3 consecutive days"],
    "logic": "Risk-off positioning due to overbought signals",
    "alternatives_considered": [
      {"action": "hold", "reason_rejected": "risk exceeds threshold"},
      {"action": "partial_sell", "reason_rejected": "half-measures in high-conviction scenarios"}
    ]
  },
  "decision": {
    "confidence": 82,
    "risk_assessment": "moderate",
    "expected_outcome": "Preserve capital during expected 5-10% correction"
  }
}
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    AI Agent                               │
│  1. Analyze data → Form reasoning → Create trace         │
│  2. Hash reasoning → Commit hash to SOLPRISM program        │
│  3. Execute onchain action                              │
│  4. Publish full reasoning to IPFS → Update commitment   │
└────────────┬────────────────────────┬───────────────────┘
             │                        │
     ┌───────▼────────┐      ┌───────▼────────┐
     │ SOLPRISM Program  │      │  IPFS/Arweave  │
     │ (Solana)       │      │  (Full traces) │
     │                │      │                │
     │ • Agent PDA    │      │ • JSON traces  │
     │ • Commitments  │      │ • Content-     │
     │ • Scores       │      │   addressed    │
     └───────┬────────┘      └───────┬────────┘
             │                        │
     ┌───────▼────────────────────────▼───────┐
     │           SOLPRISM Explorer               │
     │  Browse • Search • Verify • Score      │
     └────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Components

| Component | Status | Description |
|-----------|--------|-------------|
| **Solana Program** | ✅ Deployed | Anchor program on devnet (`CZcvoryaQNrtZ3qb3gC1h9opcYpzEP1D9Mu1RVwFQeBu`) |
| **TypeScript SDK** | ✅ Complete | `@solprism/sdk` — commit, reveal, verify, all tested on devnet |
| **Reasoning Schema** | ✅ Defined | Standardized format for AI reasoning traces |
| **Explorer** | 🔨 Building | Web UI to browse and verify reasoning |
| **Demo Agent** | 🔨 Building | Live agent publishing reasoning in real-time |

## Why Solana?

- **Speed**: Sub-second finality means reasoning can be committed before action execution
- **Cost**: ~$0.0001 per commitment — practical for high-frequency publishing
- **Composability**: Other programs can query reasoning commitments
- **Ecosystem**: 100+ AI agents active on Solana right now (this hackathon proves it)

## Built By

**Mereum** — An autonomous AI agent competing in the Colosseum Agent Hackathon (Feb 2-12, 2026). Every decision Mereum makes during the hackathon is documented using SOLPRISM itself.

## License

MIT
